---
title: Leg 10 Great Gaddesden to Berkhamsted Common
excerpt: 'In which we see a lot of trees and a monument that rises above them'
name: leg10
image: leg10-monument-closeup.jpg
date: 2020-11-15
tags:
  - Great Gaddesden
  - Little Gaddesden
  - Ashridge
  - Nettleden
  - Aldbury
  - Tring
  - Frithsden
---

In a parallel universe today would have been the third time that Helen had organised the British Schools Orienteering Championships. [Cassiobury Park](https://www.happyherts.routegadget.co.uk/rg2/#294), Watford, was in 1999 and we have four legs to go before we get there. [Wormley Woods](https://www.happyherts.routegadget.co.uk/rg2/#56) was in 2010, and should have been today as well, and that will be another three or four legs later. Before we set off we both had to finish a few rounds of the [WOC99 Orienteering Unlocked](https://orienteeringunlocked.com/world-champs-1999/) event. This has been renamed from Lockdown Orienteering just in time for lockdown to start again. Helen spent quite a long time running virtually round Glen Afric in Catching Features, and I spent slightly less time doing the same, as well as navigating round a maze and trying to work out which blurry photo was the correct boulder in the Photo-O round. The [results system](https://www.maprunner.co.uk/lockdown-results/events/e009) is another Maprunner creation.

The weather forecast had looked awful for the weekend, but things gradually improved and it looked like later on Sunday might not be too bad. Catching Features filled enough time to allow the weather to clear a bit and it looked like we shouldn't get too wet so we decided to risk it. We needed a short diversion since what used to be the M10 was closed, so we ended up going the back way in to Hemel Hempstead. There was quite a lot of standing water on the roads, and we splashed through a big puddle at Water End. I mentally decided that the red kites we saw as we got to Great Gaddesden didn't count. Surprisingly I didn't see another one until just before Tring.

We parked by the school and set off up the first hill of the day towards the Buddhist monastery at the top of the ridge. The main building is somewhat obscured by hedges and building works, but we passed someone who we assumed was a resident dressed in flowing white robes and black wellingtons. Somehow he had escaped the mud and puddles that now filled what used to be the old road to Hudnall. A large turkey farm was a bit of a surprise. Turning off the old road we set out across another enormous ploughed field with a vaguely trampled line going in the expected direction.

Eventually we emerged onto the road at Little Gaddesden. Most of the village was further along to the right, but we crossed between the houses and entered the [Ashridge Estate](https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/ashridge-estate). Much of the rest of the day would be on the Estate, and this was by far the most wooded leg we had done so far, and as far as I can see will remain so until the end. The path to Golden Valley had a sign advertising a detour to avoid a steep muddy path so we set off on a contouring route. This met the main path almost immediately, at which point it doubled back to almost where we had started. At least we got to see the flint wall along the path that was being repaired, which was apparent;y 200 years old.

The signage at this point was somewhat lacking, but we headed in what seemed to be roughly the right direction up the parkland of Golden Valley, which is yet another Capability Brown production. Two great spotted woodpeckers flew noisily across in front of us. These were the highlight of what turned out to be a rather disappointing day from the avian point of view.

Coming out of the trees we crossed in front of [Ashridge House](https://www.ashridgehouse.org.uk/), skirted the golf course and set off down the avenue that leads from the house all the way to the [Bridgewater Monument](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bridgewater_Monument) over two kilometres away. The sun was now out and glinted off the green of the funerary urn on top of the 33m column. Standard historical facts include that it was built in 1832 in memory of Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater, who was known as the Canal Duke and the Father of Inland Navigation. Less-known facts are quite how visible it is from a long way away. The full column is in view from the main house to the east, and the top of the monument emerges above the trees and is visible from many points in the Bulbourne Valley to the west, as we were about to find out. 

It was a long straight muddy run along the edge of the [Ashridge East](https://www.happyherts.routegadget.co.uk/rg2/#250) map. We then skirted the ha-ha to avoid the large puddle in the bottom, crossed the road and started along Monument Drive on the [Ashridge North](https://www.happyherts.routegadget.co.uk/rg2/#345) map. There were National Trust signs at the junction saying that all the car parks were full, and indeed the drive was full of cars all the way along. The small car park half way along was completely full of caravans and food tents for whatever film was being shot in the woods. At this point we were only about 50 metres from Buckinghamshire. The country boundary runs just to the north of Monument Drive and passes through the large pond in the woods just before the monument. 

Helen decided to make use of the facilities at the National Trust Visitor Centre and I took yet more photos of the monument in bright sunlight. The Visitor Centre is at about 220m above sea level, and the base of the monument probably one or two metres higher on the grassy hill-top. This is the highest point on the Hertfordshire Way. Very little of Hertfordshire is over 200 metres. There is this small area in Ashridge, and a slightly larger area south of Tring where the top of the ridge running round to Wendover Woods gets to a full 245m on the county boundary near Hastoe.

There were a lot of visitors so we passed up the opportunity of something from the ice cream van (this is the middle of November remember) and instead headed down the steep path to Aldbury. Even this path was busy with walkers, including three people who passed us carrying pints of beer in plastic glasses. These turned out to have come from The Greyhound Inn which was overrun with people .Rather than join them we kept on past the stocks and pond and entered the churchyard at St John the Baptist. The monument stood out above the trees on top of the ridge behind.

The final section to Tring station was along The Ridgeway. Helen walked all of this in a week in 2016 up  so she had already done this bit, as well as the short section north up to Ivinghoe Beacon where it ends Tring station itself is a very large car park in a field in the middle of nowhere, and there is certainly no sign of Tring itself. We had reached the furthest point west on the Hertfordshire Way but it is slightly strange place.

Back up towards ridge along field edge. Views across towards Tring and highest point in Hertfordshire.

Cross gallops with plastic filling. Up hill. Not so many people. Started moving faster. Lots of mud and puddles. Cross road to Ashridge East. Needs remapping. Lots of brambles.

Snacks on edge of large open field. Soon on Frithsden Beeches map. Event in 1989. Gorse on wide ride. Along edge of ex golf course. Berkhamsted on hill off to right. [World War I troop training trenches](https://www.chilternsaonb.org/about-chilterns/chilterns-commons-project/history-project/berkhamsted-wwi-troop-training-trenches.html). Found control site. Then open, now mature trees.

We got to a road bend on the edge of the woods and decided that was enough for today. We had done over 18 kilometres since leaving Great Gaddesden and this would be by far the longest section of the the Hertfordshire Way we would manage in one day. We now only had a very short side of a triangle left to do to get back to the car, although it did include three more hills to climb. We set off back up through the woods and reached the War Memorial and car park which would be the next start point. The route crossed an empty golf course and then we passed down a narrow path between houses with very long front and back gardens before coming out onto the [Fritshden East](https://www.happyherts.routegadget.co.uk/rg2/#215) map. We passed two more control sites that we had both first visited 31 years ago.

It was all downhill through Fritshden and then all uphill on the other side of the road to reach the farm that we use for event car parking. This has a long driveway and the gate at the end had a pile of Amazon parcels net to it. Then it was downhill again towards Nettleden. This had obviously been an important route at some point n the past since it had very extensive brick and flint walls all along a deep cutting, as well as a large bridge taking another track overhead.

It started to rain as we reached Nettleden but we stopped to put on coats which caused it to stop almost straight away. A 50 metre detour allowed me to photograph St Lawrence Church. Then it was the final climb of the day. Looking back I counted four more alpacas amongst the sheep on the far hill. Unfortunately we had seen a few more cows today, so alpacas are now only fourth in the list of large mammals seen on the Hertfordshire Way so far.

We got a helpful phone call from Peter to say that the two wheelbarrow wheels Helen was waiting for had been delivered, so we would now be able to start moving the compost to the allotment. The view of the Buddhist monastery were no better from this direction so we pressed on and headed back down the way we had come to Great Gaddesden. It started raining as we reached the car, but it had been a much better day than we could have imagined when we set out.
